---
title: "Java to Go"
date: 2019-03-23T03:36:20+01:00
draft: true 
---

Together with a colleague I gave a talk about Go at the Digital Festival conference organized by
Cegeka. The focus of my portion of the talk was partly about how Go sets itself apart from some
other mainstream languages, and partly about the experience of transitioning as a Java developer.

<a href='digital-festival-presentation.JPG'><img src="digital-festival-presentation.JPG" width='400px'></img></a>

Go holds the philosophy that _less is more_, which results in having a smaller toolbox. The slide
above shows some of this philosophy in action. Explaining why Go made these choices and the
consequences thereof is beyond the scope of what I want to write about today. Instead I'd like to
focus on my experience of transitioning to the role of full-time Go developer.

## Let's Go!

Let me start off by saying that I have always enjoyed developing in Java. I've written Java for
about a decade. To avoid looking biased, I'd also want to state that over the course of the past ~15
years that I've been writing code, I've done so in a plethora of languages and Go is _not_ my
favourite of them. Though the more I write Go, the more I like it. 

Go turned out to be one of the more polarizing languages that I've learned to date. When you learn
C#, Java or even C++ there seems to be general agreement that learning those languages is a useful
endeaver and the majority of people are, in my experience, not strongly _against_ or in _favour_ of
those languages. On the other hand, you've got the languages that I love but where I'm a clear
minority in the industry. Languages like Haskell, Common Lisp and openDylan are perhaps less liked
or, at least in my circles, regarded as 'useless' languages. 

But Go has been somewhat of a special snowflake in this regard. Go seems to spark either strong
positive reactions or strong negative reactions, but rarely does it leave people indifferent. 

## My initial experience

I started looking into Go somewhere around the end of 2017 and due to my background my initial
reaction was not exactly positive. Having worked in higher-level language and being quite happy with
my lambda expressions and really strict typing. On top of that, I'd been working with Java for a
long time and was used to my collection data-structures and generics. 

Getting stuck on problems due to not having the correct data structure on hand and being unable to
write them cleanly (`interface{}` is _not_ clean) was a source of some frustration.

Luckily, a couple years before, I had a similar bad reaction to Python. I thought the language
looked horrible to write, but fast-forward a few years and it's one of my most often used languages. 
Together with some friends we even participated in the 'Flemish Programming Competition' using
Python.

Thus I reasoned it was a good idea to force myself to actually solve some problems with Go. If we
fast-forward about ~1.5 years and Go is one of the languages I really like.


